in this video we are going to look at
the notification workflow in terms of
theory we will cover the different types
of notifications and make the
distinction between active and passive
notifications we will also look at tools
and techniques like information radiator
and extreme feedback in the demo we'll
implement the notification part of the
CI workflow and we will use a build
monitor and slack notifications let's
start by defining what we mean by
notifications notifications are alerts
sent to members of a development team
and informing them that something new
has occurred for example a broken build
or a failing test ideally the CI server
should inform rapidly the right people
for example alerting the person who last
committed code that the latest build is
broken notifications can be categorized
into passive and active passive
notifications also called the pool
notifications just inform that something
has happened without much detail
therefore the developer needs to
actively consult the latest build status
and check what went wrong
conversely active notifications also
known as push notifications proactively
alert to the developer and provide
details about the root cause tools for
passive notifications are emails RSS
feeds and build monitor views active
notifications can be implemented via
emails chat and instant messaging and
SMS note that emails are listed in both
categories in fact it depends on how you
configure the email notification we will
see an example during the demo
information radiators are another tool
for spreading information in the team
and are often used in agile
methodologies an information radiator is
a display device located in a prominent
place where team members and passers-by
can easily see it in the frame of CI it
typically displays a summary of the most
important build results and their
current status information radiators are
not just used for CIS CD and are a great
tool for spreading a CI DevOps and agile
culture in your office in the demo we
will see how to set up a build monitor
view for the information radiator using
the build monitor plugin in Jenkins this
is an example of information radiator
that it's used in my development team as
we have an open office setting at work
the information radiator is located in a
strategic place where people pass by and
where we hold our daily stand-up
meetings an extension of the information
radiator is the concept of extreme
feedback this is a way to alert
developers of important to build
notifications using a creative physical
device here the imagination is the limit
and devices usually integrate catchy
visual signals and sound for this check
out the sounds plug-in in Jenkins here
is an example of extreme feedback device
using a lamp which changes color
according to the build status and speaks
out to the name of the possible culprit
usually the last developer who committed
code to the codebase extreme feedback
devices are great fun but they also make
the whole team aware of the urgency of
fixing broken bills and failing tests
there isn't a bulletproof notification
strategy and you have to find the best
one for your team according to different
factors when setting up notifications
bear in mind that the size of your team
the location and the space where the
team works the tools already used by the
development team and the criticality of
your bills I recommend to use a mix of
active and passive notifications as
these different strategies are often
complementary now let's have a look at
our CI workflow that we started
implementing in the past videos and
completed by notifications
I'm going to briefly show you how to
configure email notifications but I will
mainly focus on setting up a built
monitor view and slack notifications the
only prerequisite to follow the demo are
a slack account and the slack workspace
if you don't have them already you can
sign up for free on slack at this link
now without any further ado let's start
the practical part of this video first I
want to show you how to set up email
notifications as this is the simplest
notification to set up go inside the CI
workflow project that we created in the
past videos click on configure and head
to post build actions click on add post
build action and select email
notification inside recipients put the
email address you want to send the
notifications to if you have multiple
addresses separate them via comma you
can select your notification strategy
for example you can send an email for
every unstable build if you want to send
active notifications via email with
additional details about the bill to the
error and the culprit I recommend to use
the editable email notification add a
post build action and click on editable
email notification this allows you to
send more detail about the build does
proactively informing developers about
what went wrong I let you discover the
options at your leisure as I want to
show you other types of notifications as
well remember that in order to send
emails the machine where Jenkins is
deployed must be configured to send
emails this is often configured by
default on a server but the best way to
check it is to help to manage Jenkins go
to configure system
scroll down to email notification and
tick the box test configuration by
sending test email enter your email and
click on test configuration this sends
the email from localhost but you can
also configure a specific SMTP server
now let's set up a build monitor view in
order to do this we need an additional
plug-in that might not be installed by
default on Jenkins
LT s go back to Jenkins manage Jenkins
and manage plugins first check on the
tab installed if the plug-in named the
build monitor view is already installed
if not switch to tab available and
search here for build monitor view
select the plug-in and install without
restart we don't need to restart Jenkins
so we can use this plug-in straightaway
go back to Jenkins and in the view tabs
click on + to add a new view a new
option build monitor view has been added
to so select it give it a name and the
view name and click on OK we
automatically get inside the
configuration for this view and add a
few jobs to monitor the view you can
play with the other options like
ordering the bells adding committers etc
finally click on OK and here you have a
beautiful build monitor view then you
can hook to a screen in your office
notice that the monitor view updates
automatically when something occurs no
need to refresh the page you can play
with the settings by the setting icon
for example increase or decrease the
font size
go back to Jenkins and you can notice
that the built monitor view has been
added to the View tab now let's set up
the slack notification I assume you
already have a slack account and
workspace here I'm showing you mine via
a slack app I have installed you can
also use the web version if you prefer
this is my slack workspace named hands
on Jenkins and this is the channel where
I want to send the build notifications
to now open your favorite browser and
head to the URL my dot slash comm slash
services slash new slash Jenkins - see I
enter the workspace URL this is my
workspace I just showed you on slack and
click on continue sign in to your
workspace using your slack credentials I
assume you already have a slack account
and click on sign in
you are directed to the setup
instructions and you can see that the
base URL and an integration token have
been generated for your slack workspace
we will use this values to configure
Jenkins in order to interact with slack
so keep this tab open the next step is
to install the slack notification
plug-in go back to Jenkins click on
manage Jenkins and then on manage
plugins click on the tab available and
search for the plug-in called slack
notification select it and click on
install without restart and wait until
the installation finishes
although it says that you can start
using this plug-in right away
sometimes I experience with errors so
this time I prefer to restart Jenkins
wait until Jenkins has been restarted
then go back to manage engines and head
to configure system
in here search for slack notifier we
start by setting up the base URL we can
find this value in the slack integration
page we saw before copy the URL and
paste it under base URL inside
integration token you could also copy
paste the token from the slack
integration but a more secure way to use
it is to store it as an integration
token credential ID click on add and
then on Jenkins
in kind select secret text and the
secret copy-paste the integration token
then type an ID and description for your
token finally click on add once the
integration token credential ID has been
created you can select it from the drop
down menu in team sub-domain type the
name of the slack workspace on the
channel type the name of the slack
channel you want to send notifications
to and remember to prefix it with the
ashtag
you can test the connection between
Jenkins and slack by clicking on test
connection
this should return a successful message
and you should see a test message in the
slack Channel
finally click on save let's go back to
the configuration on the CI workflow job
and head to post build actions are the
possible action and select slack
notifications here you can select when
to send a notification to slack for
example let's send notifications upon
success failure and unstable click on
advanced and you can see other
configuration options you can also
override the slack configuration we set
up globally for example if you want to
send notifications for this job to
another channel click on save
and build the CI workflow job
get inside the console output and wait
until the job successfully completes
finally go to slack and see that the
notification has been successfully sent
congratulations you just set up slack
notifications this is the end of the
demo for this video and the end of
section 3 let's recap what you learn in
this section in terms of theory we
describe what continuous integration
continuous delivery and continuous
deployment are we explored the Maven
build tool and described different types
of tests and notifications in the
practical part we implemented a full CI
workflow using github jenkins maven and
slack so now that's what you learned in
this section by heading to the companion
github repository in here you will find
a few questions to test your Jenkins
knowledge and the practical exercise you
will also find some suggested solutions
to the exercises and if you want you can
interact with me by a github in the next
section we are going to learn what
pipeline is code means and start
building pipelines with Jenkins